Good afternoon. Imagine that you are a student of the Economic University, who studied the basic economic and management disciplines for two years,
the basics of macro and microeconomics, the basics of management, the basics of marketing, and so on.
Well, in general, he met with the university students.
Now he needs to choose a specialization for himself in order to become a cool professional in the field.
It can be marketing, it can be logistics, it can be accounting, it can be controlling.
And the student thinks about how to make this choice.
He looks at the coin and thinks that, in principle, this choice can be made strategically by throwing the coin.
If the coin falls to the floor and the eagle falls, then he can choose marketing for himself.
If it falls to the top, then he will choose logistics for himself.
If it hangs in the air, then it will be accounting.
If the coin is on the edge, then it will be controlling.
The second option is that he can look around, try to analyze what professions will be in demand in the market in the near future.
And also look inside, close your eyes and think about what talents and inclinations I have, what attracts me the most.
If this is a creative personality, then, of course, he will choose accounting for himself, remembering such a term as creative accounting.
Companies, businesses often have the same situations when you understand that everything that has been so far cannot remain so and further.
You need to live differently and you think where to go, to the right, to the left or straight.
Companies often face the problem of a cardinal breakdown of the party's general line.
And in order to do this consciously, they have to do a strategic analysis.
Analysis of the external environment, analysis of oneself.
We will discuss the key tools that can be used to make this analysis.
My name is Vladislav Tolkach. I am the director of the Academy of Controlling.
This is the main place of my work.
This project is implemented by the joint efforts of the German School of Business and the Academy Controller.
I am a practicing business coach and consultant.
I specialize in the topic of strategy, organizational development and, of course, controlling.
The main tools of strategic analysis that we will discuss are used to understand the environment of the external environment in which our company operates.
There is a PEST analysis, or it is also called STEP.
This is an abbreviation of four English words.
This is an analysis of the political, economic, social and technological environment.
If you make an abbreviation, it turns out either PEST or STEP.
The second tool allows you to understand your industry.
Here I must mention the work of the guru of strategic management, Michael Porter,
who, for the sake of understanding his industry, recommends to businessmen to analyze competition, as well as the power of substitutes.
These are products from adjacent industries that can gnaw money from the pie that we and our competitors in our industry claim.
Here is the analysis of customers and suppliers.
The fifth tool is the so-called entry barriers.
This is what prevents potential players from breaking into our industry.
The third tool is the analysis of the factors of success in the industry.
In principle, it is a summary of the entire previous work.
When we rewrite all the issues that should be solved in our industry, if we want to earn something,
we need to work on them.
However, these issues are usually divided into two parts.
The first part is the basic issues that allow us to play football,
allow us to play on the football field, but do not guarantee us a win.
The second part is the so-called strategic issues.
If we work strategically, we have a chance to win football.
The fourth tool is the analysis of the strengths and weaknesses.
This is the analysis of the company itself, what is good and what is not very good at the moment.
The summary tool that summarizes the entire previous analytical work is the so-called SWOT analysis.
This is again an English-language abbreviation.
These four letters mean again the strengths and weaknesses, as well as the list of threats, opportunities and threats.
The last part of our course is the organizational aspects.
We will talk about how to do this analysis better, who to call to a strategic meeting, how to distribute roles.
These are the nuances that we will discuss in the last part.
In the 1970s, the Armenian radio was asked if a snake could break its spine.
The Armenian radio thought and replied that a snake could break its spine if it crawled along the party's general line.
Sometimes the company experiences a stage of a radical break in the party's general line,
when the leadership comes to work on Monday and says,
guys, everything is wrong, everything we do is wrong, it was right before, but it is not right in the future.
We must remake our strategy, remake our business model, go another way, otherwise we will not survive.
Imagine that you are a distributor of body care, home chemistry, cosmetics, and you are in a tight spot.
On the one hand, the factory is pressuring you, twisting your hands at the price and payment conditions.
On the other hand, the clients are pressing you harder, who also twist your hands at the price and payment conditions.
In addition, the competition is getting tougher, and you understand that you cannot live like this.
You understand that you have three options as a distributor.
Either go into production, or go into logistics, become a cool logistics operator, or create your own business.
The second example is also about this.
The company produces lasers.
Until some point, it felt good in the industry, but everything changes, competition changes, suppliers change, clients change.
The management of the company understands that it is impossible to live as we used to live.
I drew three scenarios for myself.
The first scenario is the so-called operational perfection, when the company will bet on a standard mass laser,
to produce lasers in a very narrow range, focusing on the mass market, and polishing its logistics and production.
At the same time, the business cannot boast of innovative ideas, it is unlikely that it can boast of an amazing service or a strong brand.
The second scenario is the product management, which usually involves huge investments in new-ocre, in the final development.
Some of these investments go to waste, but some of them are likely to be successful,
and the company offers the market an absolutely innovative product, an absolutely innovative laser,
and can remove the cream from this product for some time.
The third scenario is customization,
offering a laser to a client with very sharp edges,
because this is what the client wants,
according to Feng Shui, this is correct, when the laser has round corners and yellow color,
as well as a specific lamp that the client wants to see.
There are three ways to go, operational perfection, product management, or int-poshiv.
But the company cannot go in three ways at the same time, due to the limitation of all types of resources.
The third example is the company working on the ice cream market.
In recent years, the ice cream market has not grown very intensively, and at the moment it is not growing at all.
At the same time, another direction has grown, the so-called cold logistics,
that is, cold transport, in which you can transport ice cream, dumplings, frozen vegetables,
and warehouses where all this can also be stored.
This cold logistics has grown to the same volume in terms of revenue and profit as ice cream.
If you do this closely, you can earn a lot, because the market is still quite raw.
And again, the company thinks about how to live further, whether we need this ice cream,
or whether we should become operators in the cold logistics market.
All these three companies, in order to make a conscious strategic choice,
and develop a competitive strategy that is understandable for themselves and for their employees,
must make a so-called strategic analysis at the stage number 0.
The logic of this strategic analysis is presented on this slide.
In a nutshell, it consists of two main tasks,
this is a strategic analysis of the external environment and a strategic analysis of the company itself.
When we analyze the external environment, we usually use two tools.
This is the analysis of the PEST factors, this is the so-called analysis of the remote environment.
The company looks at the policy and legal factors that can influence its work in the near future.
The company tries to understand how the economic environment will behave in which it works.
The company tries to understand the factors of social nature.
And the company tries to understand the factors of technological nature.
But this is the so-called remote environment.
In addition, there are factors of the so-called near environment,
which are very well described in the works of Michael Porter,
and are known as the five-force model.
The first is the competition in the industry,
and the power of the substitutes is the clients and suppliers,
as well as the analysis of the entry barriers that prevent the emergence of new players in the industry.
If we use these two tools,
we will get a good understanding of what is happening and will happen in our external environment.
In addition, in order to develop a strategy,
you need to understand your own strengths and weaknesses,
what is already good and what is not very good.
For these purposes, I recommend the analysis of the strengths and weaknesses,
which can be done in the format of the so-called chain of value creation.
The fourth point is, as a rule, the requirements of the owners,
financial and non-financial,
can significantly affect the strategic choice and the business model
that the employee management is trying to implement in practice.
The results of all these analyses can be summarized in the final summary document,
which is called the SWOT analysis,
and represents a set of strengths and weaknesses,
opportunities and threats listed on a piece of paper in the A4 format,
in the One Page Only format.
After that, we can assess and weigh the further paths of our own development.
We can assess whether we will go into production, logistics, or our own retail,
or we will go into operational improvement, product leadership, or int-poshiv.
After weighing the alternatives, we will make our own strategic choice.
So, the analysis of external environment factors,
which consists of two sections,
the analysis of the factors of the distant environment and the analysis of the factors of the near environment.
When analyzing the factors of the distant environment,
we can use the PEST or STEP model.
I repeat that this is an abbreviation of four English words.
The political-legal environment is the letter P,
the economic environment is the letter E,
the letter S is the factors of the social environment,
and the letter T is technology.
What do we analyze at the stage of the analysis of political-legal issues?
We try to understand how much the law that operates in the external environment
can affect our business.
We try to predict how it will change,
in a positive or negative direction.
The second point is to understand how seriously the state can interfere in our business.
The third point is to understand how great the level of corruption in the market we work in is.
We ask ourselves questions like this
before developing a strategy,
trying to understand our political-legal environment.
A small example on this topic.
Ukraine is a market for buildings made of fast-mounted metal structures.
A construction company offers its customers buildings made of metal.
It can be a logistics center, a warehouse, a production facility,
a hypermarket, a metal box.
In 2005, the company felt very good,
experienced a stage of rapid growth,
at the end of the year it rented a new office space with a margin,
and the sales plan for the next year was quite ambitious.
But due to political reasons, the orange revolution,
sales fell significantly next year.
Potential customers did not have less money,
but they were afraid to invest in logistics centers,
hypermarkets, real estate.
They were waiting for the government's decision
on what was allowed and what was not allowed in Ukraine.
They waited for almost a year,
and only in November of the following year,
the company sales began to grow again.
We understand how political factors can affect our success.
The letter E, the letter M, is the economy.
We analyze inflation,
we try to understand how the cost of capital on the market will change,
whether capital will increase or decrease,
we try to understand how unemployment will behave,
what will happen in the labor market, and so on.
The letter S is the social environment factors.
Here we analyze the demography on the market,
we try to understand the cultural features of some markets,
we can analyze the level of education on the market.
These are the questions we discuss,
analyzing the letter S, the social environment.
The fourth section is the technological environment factors.
The influence of the Internet on our business,
the influence of new technologies in our industry,
the influence of IT.
These are the factors we analyze before developing a strategy.
A small nuance.
If a company operates in several markets,
I mean geographical markets,
for example, it operates in the Russian market,
in the Ukrainian market, in the Belarusian market,
and in the Polish market.
It may be that the letter P on these four markets
is quite different and affects the business in a very different way.
Again, the letter E, the economic factors,
can be quite different on these markets
and can also affect our business.
The conclusion is that the company will have to pass this PEST analysis four times.
Pass the PEST analysis for the Russian market,
for the Ukrainian, for the Belarusian, for the Polish,
to understand all the nuances that it will have to consider
in the next two or three years if it wants to continue working on these markets.
A small nuance.
When we do a PEST analysis,
we evaluate the positive or negative impact of all these
political, legal, economic, social and technological factors on our business.
We must understand that the same factors
in companies from different industries can have a positive or negative effect
on some companies, have a neutral effect.
For example, in Krzysztof Obloy's book
The Strategies of a Successful Company,
which is recommended in the list of literature,
there is a funny observation about how the factor on the letter S,
namely the formation of the YAPI class,
Young Professionals,
in Poland, has a very different effect on businesses from different industries.
It is very positive for restaurants,
for car and car salesmen,
that young professionals are being formed in Poland.
But companies that produce children's goods,
diapers, children's food,
they are in complete sorrow,
because YAPI children are usually started late.
And if a company makes tractors,
then the formation of the YAPI group has no effect on it.
And another nuance.
When we do a PEST analysis,
we do not just list the factors that affect us.
We must immediately ask ourselves the question,
what exactly a particular structural unit of our company should do,
or, on the contrary, should not do, in response to the effect of this factor.
In the materials, we have an example of a PEST analysis of a company that produces websites.
It is engaged in web design.
The company is located in one of the regional centers of the Russian Federation.
There it has a production site and a central office.
However, the company is interested in the Moscow market,
and it has a representative here who works with clients
and, analyzing the PEST factors,
the company, for itself, by the letter S,
denotes a high degree of snobbery in public consciousness in Moscow.
And we must immediately understand what this means for our business,
for the individual structural units of our company.
It means that the company should look like a Moscow one,
it should have an office in Moscow,
it should have a convincing client list,
and sometimes for this you have to win a tender
to supply the site, for example, Coca-Cola or Procter & Gamble for 1 euro.
That is, the Coca-Cola company announces a tender,
I want a site,
and the company we are considering won a tender for 1 euro,
because it needs a convincing client list to work in the Moscow market.
So, when we analyze the PEST factors,
we always ask ourselves what this factor means for our company,
how it will affect our company in the near future,
and what we should do and what we should not do in response to this factor.
We have at least two examples from different industries in our materials.
For each tool that we are considering,
the first task that I recommend you to do is to conduct a PEST analysis for your company.
You can find the image of those mini cases, those examples that are in our materials.
PEST analysis of the Russian market with the eyes of the company that makes the sites,
and the example of the PEST analysis of the Ukrainian market with the eyes of the company that works in the kitchen furniture market.
Please remember that if you have to work in several markets,
you will most likely have to do several PEST analyses.
For one market, PEST, and for another market, PEST.
And please remember that you do not just list that inflation is like this,
that the currency rate is like this, that unemployment is like this, and that the level of education is like this.
You must immediately try to understand how this will affect your business in the near future,
and ideally, even form a so-called to-do list, a list of what needs to be done in the near future
in order to take into account the effect of this factor.
For example, the company sells spare parts and says that in recent years there have been more traffic jams on the streets of cities,
and more and more often people began to buy Asian and American brands.
Such trends are on the market.
What does this mean from the point of view of our strategy?
This means that our product portfolio needs to include more spare parts for American and Asian cars.
Given that there are many traffic jams, the clutch breaks, the gearbox breaks,
so the demand for these spare parts will most likely increase, and we will be able to sell more of them in the coming years.
This is a specific conclusion for the product portfolio based on the results of the PEST analysis.
Please, not just a list of factors, but a list of what needs to be done in the next column.
A so-called to-do list, a list of necessary actions,
which can be immediately recorded in a document called a strategy.
The next tool we will look at is the analysis of the factors of the near environment.
This analysis is carried out using the model proposed by Michael Porter.
This model is known as the Five Force model.
Michael Porter, explaining why the value of the profitability of the invested capital is average,
in different industries, proposes the Five Force model.
He says that the ROI, the profitability of the invested capital,
depends on how the Five Force configuration is formed in the industry,
how sharp the competition in this industry is, and how powerful the supply of spare parts is.
Spare parts are products from other industries,
which can bite off a piece of the pie that we and our competitors claim.
These are not our direct competitors, these are players from other industries,
but they are able to pull the money of our clients.
In principle, these are two similar forces, but Porter divides them into two parts.
The first force is the competition, these are players in our industry.
The second force is players from other industries,
which are able to influence the situation in the industry in which we work with our competitors.
The third force is clients, with whom we trade in terms of price and payment conditions,
and suppliers, with whom we also trade in terms of price and payment conditions.
The fourth force is the entry barriers, these are the brick walls that we ourselves or jointly build with our competitors.
We can add barbed wire to the top, and a couple of machine tools with dogs,
so that new players do not come to our industry.
If we do this, then with other equal ROI, the profit of the invested capital will be greater.
For example, IKEA, working in the Russian market, complains in an interview to a Russian magazine
that local competitors have lobbied for high customs duties, which IKEA is forced to pay for customs.
Local Russian furniture makers lobbied for this regulatory act in their interests,
and, in fact, they have taken their position in the industry with a fairly high brick wall.
If they had not done this, the profit of the invested capital, with other equal ones, would have been less.
Let's try to understand how the configuration of 5 forces on the porter affects the assignment of the profitability of the invested capital in the industry.
The German brewery industry, the competition in the beer market in Germany is the most severe for several centuries.
In 1516, the so-called Reinhardt's Code was adopted in Germany,
according to which beer can be called a drink consisting only of water, malt and hops.
There can be no other components in beer.
If there is ascorbic acid or orange zest in beer, then this drink should be called not beer, but something else.
Players in the industry work with the same set of resources, namely water, malt and hops.
Water is about the same, malt is about the same, hops are about the same.
They need to be different from each other in at least one way or another, but in this industry this is quite difficult.
We can say that all the niches and niches in the German brewery market are clogged for a long time.
For example, in Bavaria there is the city of Bamberg, where a local player in the beer market produces the so-called Rauchbier,
which can probably be translated into Russian as smoked beer.
This is beer that smells a little like smoke or smoked sausage.
No benzoles are added to the beer, this is water, malt and hops, this is Reinhardt's Code, the law of 1516.
But the technology of making this drink itself obviously involves the use of some coals through which this beer is filtered,
and as a result it smells a little like smoked sausage.
That is, the niches and niches are clogged, the competition is fierce.
In addition, players in this industry have to reconcile, not reconcile, but reckon with the actions of the substitutes.
This can be water, ordinary water, which the Germans drink more and more.
It can be wines from the New World, Chilean, Argentinian, not only from the New World.
It can be weak alcohol cocktails, it can sometimes even be ice cream.
If you look at the sales, beer and other drinks on the German market,
you can see that beer has been declining in recent years,
and the volume of water consumption, the volume of wine consumption, the volume of weak alcohol cocktails, they are growing, and quite seriously.
The younger generation of Germans says that beer is an old-fashioned dad's drink.
This is the drink that the dad drinks when he comes home from work.
Well, for a young German, drinking an old-fashioned drink is not good, he must drink a weak alcohol cocktail.
In other words, the power of substitutes, products from adjacent and other industries is also very high.
The client. The client can be divided into two parts.
These are retail networks that buy at this price and may not pay 180 days,
and the end consumers, who, as we said, are not doing very well either, switching to other drinks, water, wine, and so on.
Suppliers.
Gold is constantly rising, copper is constantly rising, electricity is constantly rising.
Suppliers of equipment also spin beer makers' hands.
In general, almost by the entire list of suppliers, everything is quite difficult.
In such a heavy industry, the profitability of invested capital will obviously not be very high.
There are probably not so many such sad industries, but we see how Michael Porter's theory of five forces explains what money we can count on working in the retail industry.
We must understand our industry, we must understand how competition will affect us in the near future,
how the power of clients will change, how the power of suppliers will change, what barriers there are and what barriers there may be.
But we should not passively observe this.
We must try to actively influence all five forces, offer something unique to our clients,
try to actively work with suppliers, try to be friends or go into niches, working with competitors.
We must create entry barriers, create entry barriers alone or together with competitors,
but one way or another, actively working across the entire list of five forces.
So, when we analyze our industry, we try to understand how our competitors will behave in the near future,
whether players from other industries, replacement products, will affect the situation in our industry,
how the power of clients will change, this is primarily the ability of clients to trade at a price and on payment terms,
as well as the power of suppliers, again, the ability to trade with us at a price and on payment terms.
The fifth force is the entry barriers that prevent the emergence of new players in our industry.
Typical questions that we analyze, using this tool on competition,
are to understand the degree of sharpness of competitive struggle in our industry,
to understand how consolidated players in our industry are, how the degree of consolidation will change in the near future.
By analyzing the replacement products, we ask ourselves how much better or worse are the replacement products from other industries
in terms of price-quality ratio, if we compare it with the products that our industry produces.
If we analyze our clients, we ask how great is the ability of our clients to bargain with us at a price and on payment terms.
We can imagine ourselves as a person who arranges armwrestling with a client and asks,
can I win a client at a price and on payment terms, or the client wins me at a price and on payment terms.
The same with suppliers, the same with armwrestling, the price of the purchase and the payment terms.
As for the entry barriers, everything is reduced to money, probably,
but if we do not reduce everything to money and do not analyze only the size of the investments that we need to enter the industry,
we can analyze, for example, legislative barriers, we can try to understand how deep in the consumer consciousness there are myths
that the products that are offered on the market by already existing players are good,
and we can try to understand how difficult it is for new players to get on the shelf in a retail store.
In general, the barriers to entry can be all kinds, in principle, everything can be reduced to money,
but there are factors that play a role besides financial factors.
A small but important point.
In the 21st century, the boundaries of industries are erasing, and there are a lot of interesting businesses that are created at the junction of industries.
Imagine, there is a company that produces sites, namely, promotional sites,
and, in principle, it works at the junction of two industries, the IT industry and the marketing industry.
It offers the client not just a website, it offers him a tool for promoting its products on the market.
There is a certain concept of promotion, there is a certain IT solution combined with ideas in the field of marketing.
The conclusion is that a company, analyzing its industry, should, in fact, analyze two industries,
the analysis of 5 forces for the IT industry and the analysis of 5 forces for the marketing industry.
There is no other way.
Another example.
The Controller Academy is a structure that was created in Germany in 1971 by Albrecht Dall.
It is a business built at the junction of two industries, namely, business education, in particular, controlling, and tourism.
The Controller Academy offers the client a mix between new knowledge and a cool vacation in the Alps in Bavaria.
It offers the client to come to them for a week, get new knowledge, get communication with colleagues from other industries,
get new ideas, and also spend time in nature, a clean lake, delicious Italian food, a pleasant atmosphere.
This is the so-called edutainment.
Again, the junction of two industries, in this case, business education and the recreation industry.
Again, a company operating in this business should, in fact, analyze two industries,
namely, business education and recreation industry.
The third example you see on this slide is a company that produces inter-room doors.
It has a production site, and the product made in this production site is transferred to dealers
or to its own structures that are engaged in wholesale sales.
In the end, the door goes to the retail market, and the company dreams of its own retail market, but so far it does not have one.
It has several production sites, and it has several wholesale structures that can buy on their own production sites, but can also buy from competitors.
In principle, again, analysis of two industries is necessary, analysis of 5 forces for the production part of the company,
because wholesale structures are the clients for the production part of the company.
And the second analysis is necessary for players in the wholesale market,
because the client for them is already the retailer, and the end customer who buys an inter-room door,
the supplier is not a wood supplier for the production part of the company,
but a production structure that makes a ready-made inter-room door.
And again, analysis of 5 forces for two industries is necessary.
The next nuance. When we analyze competition, as a rule, we have to divide competitors into so-called strategic groups.
A strategic group is a group of players of the same industry, which are similar to each other by some criteria.
For example, if we analyze the industry in which sites are made, we can divide the players in the industry into more or less homogeneous groups,
drawing a simple matrix in which there are two variables.
One variable will be the creativity of the sites, that is, how creative the site is.
It can be highly creative, medium-creative, or low-creative.
And the second variable is the so-called technological ability of the site.
What the site can do, what opportunities are embedded in it.
The technological ability of the site can be high, medium, or low.
On the one hand, there are students of the second or third year in this industry who can make a site for their friends or not necessarily friends.
This site will usually not be very creative and not very technological.
It can cost two bottles of beer. But this is also a site.
On the other hand, sites can be offered in this industry that are simultaneously super creative and super technological.
Such a site can cost 90 thousand euros.
On this slide you see four strategic groups.
There is a group of players in the gray industry, which offers super creative sites, but they are average in terms of technology.
There is a leader, a larger circle, and smaller players are rummaging around it.
These are small gray circles.
If you look at the orange group, this is a group of players who offer super technological sites.
And the sites can do a lot, but the creativity of these sites can be quite average.
There is also a large orange circle, and small players, whose sales volume is slightly smaller.
But they also work in this strategic group.
The upper right field is empty.
Not because no one knows how to make super creative and super technological sites.
The demand for such sites is very small.
Sometimes orders are made, but they are rare.
There is a group of students who can make a site for a bottle of beer or two.
These are blue players.
The lower left square.
And, for example, there is a strategic group of players in green, who offer medium-sized sites in terms of technology and medium-sized sites in terms of creativity.
It is impossible to say that orange players are direct competitors for blue or blue players.
The price of the question is fundamentally different.
A site for orange players or for gray players can cost several tens of thousands of euros.
And a site for blue players can cost several tens of euros.
And a very important point when we draw this table, this matrix, is the analysis of the so-called migration barriers.
If a player works in a green strategic group, he is tired of it.
Or he is not interested in it.
Or he thinks that he will not earn much money in this strategic group.
He wants to migrate to another strategic group.
For example, he must overcome the so-called mobility or migration barriers in the orange or gray group.
It can be new staff, new equipment, investment in marketing, and so on.
But in order for a company from one strategic group to move to another, it has to move up, down, left, right along this matrix.
And as a rule, you have to overcome the so-called mobility barriers.
And this is a very important point.
We must understand what mobility barriers we will have to overcome if we want to move from one strategic group to another.
The second example is the kitchen furniture industry.
A company, analyzing its strategic groups, uses the price as one variable.
How much does the kitchen cost?
The industry is divided into three parts.
There are three layers.
This is the economy class, the comfort class, and the premium class.
The economy class is 1,500 euros for the kitchen.
From 1,500 to 5,000 euros for the kitchen is the comfort class.
And everything from 5,000 euros and above to infinity is the premium class.
This is the vertical class.
What can be done in the horizontal class?
In the horizontal class, you can try to analyze yourself and your competitors in terms of the quality of the furniture offered,
in terms of its functionality, in terms of design, in terms of service support, in terms of manufacturing times.
The next variable is whether we offer the kitchen to the client on credit or not.
Another variable that we discuss with our competitors is the number of salons.
Some have more salons, some have fewer.
And the last variable is the recognition.
And this is what happens.
If you use all these variables, you can make four matrices.
A company called Capri is trying to understand its place in the industry.
How is it with quality and functionality compared to competitors?
How is it with terms and with the ability to sell on credit compared to the main competitors?
How does it look against the background of competitors in terms of furniture design and service support?
And how does it look compared to competitors in terms of design and the width of the company's network of salons?
If we do it in the format of one page only, we get a fairly clear picture of our own position in the industry compared to our competitors.
A very useful tool is the analysis of strategic groups.
It is used when we analyze our own competitors and try to understand our own place in our industry.
When we analyze our competitors, we should ask ourselves the following questions.
What are the strengths and weaknesses of the main players?
What does our competitors do better than us?
What does our competitors do worse than us?
As we look into the future, we should try to predict how the players in our industry will behave in the near future.
What are their strategies? What will they do? What will they not do?
And how will their behavior in the next two or three years affect the situation in the industry?
The third question we can ask ourselves is how great is the ability of players to negotiate with each other.
Can we be friends? Can we share our influence?
If we can, how high is the probability that our competitors will comply with the agreements and not violate them?
This is how we try to understand our competitors.
The second strength that Porter considers important is the power of the substitutes.
I repeat that these are players from other industries, but they are able to withdraw money from our industry.
There are industries where there are not many substitutes, or there are none.
But if a company produces glass, it is very difficult to say that there is a serious substitute.
You can use plastic instead of glass, but there is no clear substitute for glass.
Or a website for a company.
It is clear that no one had websites before, and companies were somehow similar, but now everyone has websites.
It is unlikely that there is a clear substitute for a website.
But there are industries where you have to make up with the actions of a large number of substitutes.
Remember the German brewery.
Or if your company works in the pharmaceutical market, offering a cold medicine to a client,
it can face a problem.
My good Czech friend says that the Czech Republic is traditionally saved from a cold with a beer in a pot.
And they do not buy Fervex, Coldrex or other drugs.
Here is a substitute for you.
This is something from another industry that is able to withdraw money from ours.
The third strength is the client.
When we analyze clients, we try to understand how clients can trade with us at a price and payment.
The first thing we have to do is segment the clients.
We have to form more or less popular segments.
These are groups of clients that are similar in a certain set of characteristics.
And then we have to assess the strength of each segment.
Because talking about clients in general is not about anything.
It is too general, not specific and useless.
Therefore, the conclusion is that the number 0 stage is segmentation of clients for the subsequent analysis of each segment.
This slide is an example of an attempt to segment the client market in the industry that produces and sells shoes.
There are 8 criteria for segmentation.
Income level, floor, age, shoe size, geography of residence, city size, occupation type and attitude to fashion or style.
These are the 8 criteria for segmentation.
A company that produces shoes and has its own shoe store network considers important in its business.
Let's look at the income level.
There is a group of clients that earn up to 300 euros per month.
There is a group of clients that earn 300-500 euros per month.
Next, 500-700.
The fourth group is in the range of 700-1000 euros per month.
Another segment is from 1000 to 2000.
And the last segment is clients that can earn from 2000 euros per month.
So, in a large cell, we divided the income level of clients into 6 groups.
I repeat, the shoe industry.
The second criteria for segmentation is floor.
It's simple.
The third criteria is age.
The company made its clients in 6 age categories.
Up to 16 years.
16-21 years.
21-30.
30-45.
45-60.
And from 60 years.
The sizes.
The sizes of the shoes.
Up to 35.
36-37.
38-39.
40-41.
42-43.
And 44 and above.
The company operates on 3 geographic markets.
Each market has its own nuances.
There are nuances of the Ukrainian market, nuances of the Baltic market, nuances of the Russian market.
Let's recall PEST.
Politics, economy, social technology.
All these 4 letters can be distinguished on these 3 markets.
Ukrainian, Baltic and Russian.
The company operates in different cities.
There are no stores yet, but there may be stores in cities with up to 20,000 inhabitants.
Again, there are no stores yet, but this is an interesting segment.
Cities with up to 20-50,000 inhabitants.
Next segment is 50-100,000 inhabitants.
The next segment is 100-1,500.
From 500,000 to a million-city is another segment.
And the last segment is a city with a million-city and above.
The type of occupation of the client is divided into a large number of groups.
We see only 4 groups on this slide.
For example, a student, an office manager of a middle level, an office manager of a high level, a head of a workshop, etc.
The company makes its clients into 3 groups.
Interested, moderate and indifferent.
Let's look at 2 target segments.
Let's try to understand how the company should work with these segments.
The next slide shows a grey segment.
This is a man who earns 2,000 euros.
He is 55 years old.
He is 43 years old.
He lives in Russia.
The population of the city is 750,000.
He works as a head of a workshop in one of the businesses.
He has a rather indifferent attitude to fashion.
This is his portrait.
This is a portrait of a second client.
This is a woman who earns 620 euros per month.
She is 24 years old.
She is 37 years old.
She lives in Ukraine, in a million-city, Kiev.
She works as an office manager of a middle level.
She has an attitude to fashion.
These are 2 very different clients.
If a company wants to work with grey and yellow,
it should understand the portrait of each client.
It is very simple.
The better we understand our client, the more we earn.
If we can draw a portrait of our grey client in the smallest details,
there is a high probability that we will earn a lot.
If a company is oriented to the yellow and grey segments,
its entire chain of processes,
from the design, to the purchase, to the production,
to the branding, to the distribution, to the retail,
can be very different.
One chain of processes will be focused on the yellow segment,
and the other chain of processes will be focused on the grey segment.
We should understand this very well.
When we analyze our clients,
the list of questions can be as follows.
First of all, as we have already said,
we try to assess the profitability of our target segments.
How much the yellow or grey segments,
or any other segment that interests us,
can trade with us in terms of price and payment conditions,
and how it will be able to change in the near future.
What is our current situation, and what will it be in 2-3 years?
The second question is the volume of purchases.
How much and how often does one segment buy,
and how much and how often does the other segment buy?
It may be that your business has a segment that buys a little bit, but often,
or maybe you have a segment that buys a lot, but very rarely.
The client's portrait changes.
It is one now, tomorrow it will be another.
We should understand how the needs of the target segments,
which we are focused on in our business, will change in the near future.
The next factor, which can be very important in some industries,
is the cost of switching from one provider to another,
and the level of loyalty.
What do I mean by this?
If we are talking about household chemicals,
for example, washing powder,
then in this industry the cost of switching from one player to another is usually not very high.
Today I am using one washing powder,
tomorrow I will not like it, I will switch it to another,
and it is not difficult for me.
However, if we are talking about software for business,
some IT solution,
then switching from one provider to another is like a marriage-divorce process.
It is quite difficult, painful and expensive.
If the costs of switching from one provider to another are high,
then the client's power will be higher.
Another factor that we can analyze,
is the share of costs of buying the product we offer in the cost structure.
For example, if we offer the end product to the client,
and the client is a metallurgical plant,
then the share of costs of buying the product will be low,
and the price sensitivity will be low.
If we offer the end product to a metallurgical plant at a high price,
the client will not feel it,
because the share of the total purchases in the structure is negligible.
Another point that we should analyze,
is the possibility of integration forward or backward along the chain.
What do I mean?
Let's imagine an oil refinery,
which can rewind the chain of its processes.
What does it mean?
It means that it can try to put drilling towers in the oil production area,
or extend the chain forward,
or make its own network of gas stations.
If we have the opportunity to extend the chain forward,
we are an oil refinery,
and we can easily put our own gas stations,
then our position in negotiations on the price of the gas network is stronger.
Another factor is the seasonality.
So, the conclusion is as follows.
We segment our clients in order to understand the needs and behavior of each of the segments that interest us,
and to work with each of them in different ways.
It is obvious that the work of a company with a target segment of a woman of pre-retirement age,
who works as a chief accountant of a large machine-building enterprise,
and who values agility and comfort in shoes,
should work with one method, and with another target segment.
A young woman of 25 years,
who prefers brightness, style and uniqueness in shoes,
with this target segment of the company,
in all parts of the chain of its own processes,
should work differently.
It is very important to understand how the portrait of your client will change in the near future,
and to be prepared for the fact that the chain of processes will have to be redone and sharpened to meet the needs of each segment.
The second example on the same topic is from another industry,
the production of kitchen furniture.
The company that we have already talked about,
divides its clients into four segments in terms of payment capabilities,
highlighting low incomes, medium, medium-high and high,
as well as into four parts in terms of proven values.
The example of this matrix, the example of segmentation of clients,
is described in detail in this business in your materials.
Having discussed our clients,
and analyzed the target segments,
and chosen the most interesting for ourselves,
we should think about how to take these chests with money at the lowest possible costs for resources.
In this case, we need to analyze the suppliers.
It is very useful to imagine the reports of profits and losses,
in which on the one hand there are incomes, and on the other there are expenses.
When we analyze the clients, we try to find those interesting segments
from which we could take more money,
and sharpen our chain of processes accordingly.
When we analyze our suppliers, we are talking about our expenses.
Here we should analyze all the articles of our costs.
It can be raw materials, it can be electricity, it can be equipment suppliers,
it can be suppliers of square meters of heating and lighting,
it can be suppliers of all kinds of services, transport, information, insurance, and so on.
It can be channels of communication with clients.
If we decide that advertising time on TV is very expensive,
we can try to reach out to the client via the Internet,
or through external advertising, or some other means.
A very important supplier is the staff that supplies us with their heads and hands,
which we use in our business and for which we pay some money.
And, of course, a very important supplier is the supplier of capital.
It can be banks, it can be other structures that can give us money for development,
and the money is not free, it costs a certain percentage.
One way or another, we have to go through the entire list of our expenses,
evaluating the ability of suppliers to trade with us at the price and on the terms of payment.
The main questions when analyzing suppliers are as follows.
First of all, again, it is the ability to trade at the price and on the terms of payment.
The second question is readiness for the stability of deliveries,
both the quality parameters and the time parameters.
Is the supplier we work with able to provide us with the level of quality we would like to have
and to supply our product or service that is stated in the contract?
The third question we can ask ourselves is whether there are substitutes for the product that the supplier supplies us with.
If there are, then the position of the supplier in negotiations changes, the power of the supplier decreases.
The same thing happens if we have an alternative for each type of resource,
if we can turn to a large enough list of suppliers.
For example, if we open the yellow page of the reference book,
and for each type of resource we need in our industry there are 384 tomato suppliers,
and all the tomato suppliers have the same number of suppliers,
then the power of the tomato suppliers over us will be small.
In some industries, a fairly important factor may be the distance of the suppliers,
as well as the ability to integrate back and forth.
If our supplier can easily extend the chain forward,
become our direct competitor, then his position in negotiations is stronger.
And vice versa, if we can easily unwind the chain and tell the supplier
that we are able to make the parts that you supply us,
then it is very easy for us.
Accordingly, our position in negotiations becomes stronger.
The second task that I recommend you to do is to analyze the factors of the environment,
try to understand your industry through the FiveForce model, the five forces of Michael Porter.
Everyone has competition, everyone has clients and suppliers,
and there are entry barriers in any industry.
Is there a substitute product factor in your business?
I don't know, because there are companies for which there is no problem with a substitute product,
but there are industries where there are a lot of substitute products from other industries.
There is a point of view that Porter did not take into account all the factors in the industry within his FiveForce concept.
For example, some experts suggest adding the sixth force of the state,
but in principle, the state factor can be spread over all the five forces,
because the state can be a competitor, a supplier, a client,
an entry barrier, like a writer of some regulatory acts or a customs officer.
But in principle, we discussed the state factor when we were submitting the PEST analysis.
The letter P, the letter P, the legal issues, we discussed them.
But it seems to me that everything is quite consistent and logical in the FiveForce concept.
Please remember that you are not just listing factors,
you are again, as with the PEST analysis, trying to understand what this means for your business,
what is included in the list of actions, what is included in the to-do list.
If the client's demand increases and the clients will be divided into more or less homogeneous groups,
each of which will have its own specific needs, requests, and so on,
then you will most likely need to develop a certain service model for each target group,
develop a standard, train the staff and control the implementation of this standard.
This is a fairly specific action that we record in our strategy, analyzing our clients.
And please remember that if your business operates at the junction of industries,
IT, marketing, business education, the recreation industry,
you will have to do this work twice, do the analysis of the FiveForce for both industries,
to take into account all the factors that you need to track when developing your strategy.
When we analyze our industry, we must work out a list of factors of success,
which will consist of two parts, the basic and the strategic.
What is the basic?
These are the factors of success, the positions that all players in the industry have approximately the same.
All these issues, the issues marked in black, are solved equally successfully, equally cheaply, equally quickly, equally efficiently.
No one can say that this is my competitive advantage, I have it better, it is cheaper or it is faster.
All players in the industry have the same positions.
These are the issues that we must solve in order to get the right to play football.
When we discuss strategic factors, we are talking about positions where one competitor may look a little better, and the other a little worse.
Someone gets it faster, someone slower, someone gets it more expensive, someone cheaper.
For example, retail.
I will tell you a story from one of my acquaintances.
In her student years, she worked in one of the retail stores, as a cashier.
A large player in the retail market in Germany.
In the mid-90s, this player did not have a scanner at the cashier.
And since the positions in the assortment were limited, 800-900 positions in the assortment, this is not such a large list.
One kind of cheese, one kind of beer, one kind of yogurt.
And the cashier at the cashier, in principle, remembers all the prices by heart.
Ideally, the cashier at the cashier should not look at the cash register, but should pull the units through the cash register at maximum speed and drum with his fingers on the keyboard, typing in the price.
So my acquaintance told me that if she saw a third person in line and saw what was in his basket, she already counted it in her head.
And the speed of her work with the product was so high that she pulled through her cash register much more units and much more buyers than the average cash register operator on their network and competing networks.
It was a cashier crisis, a small competitive advantage that was taken from store to store, showing other cashiers how to work.
And she unloaded the queue at the peak hours at the cash registers.
It can be considered a small competitive advantage, and in this scheme it will be highlighted in blue, because there is an employee on the cash register in all networks who pulls the product through the scanner or through the cash register at a certain speed.
But if she does it faster than the rest, she can claim the status of a small competitive advantage, which we designate in this scheme in blue.
In red, unique features of a company in a certain industry, which are only in its business model, which do not have competitors, are designated.
In other words, the list of basic issues can be quite large. In highly competitive industries, 80% of what our company does, its competitors do it, and with about the same level of efficiency, equally cheap, equally fast, equally high quality.
20% we leave for strategic factors, which can be highlighted in blue and red. Blue are the things that all competitors do, but not all of them do it equally well, equally fast or equally cheap.
And red positions are unique for a company that has A and does not have B and C.
On this slide you see a list of basic and strategic factors of success of a company that produces kitchen furniture in the comfort class segment.
Remember, there are economy, comfort and premium. In this case, it is the comfort class. The company has analyzed its industry and eventually divided all the factors of success into two parts, the basic and the strategic.
If we look at this matrix, we will see that all players in the industry already use approximately the same components, equally high quality. Everyone has more or less the same developed purchasing logistics.
Everyone has a delivery of furniture and its installation. And everyone has an Internet site. This is the so-called basic.
The list of strategic factors is quite large at the moment. The achievements on this list are not the same for all players, so we consider them strategic. Let's see how functional the kitchen is.
The second point on this list is the high-tech equipment that allows you to satisfy individual customer requests. Someone has such equipment, someone does not have such equipment yet.
The third factor is the optimality of production processes. Someone's production in the industry is well-organized, there are few defects, shortcomings, and low waste. Accordingly, production costs are less. Someone's production is not so well-organized, and accordingly, costs are more.
The deadlines. Someone manages to make the kitchen faster, someone has bad deadlines, and the company does not meet its promises on the deadlines for the client, and delays the production process and the order process.
The number of salons where the kitchen is sold is also a strategic factor. Not all players in the industry are equally successful. The creativity of advertising on this list. There are players who have terribly creative advertising, memorable, and there are players who are not so good.
But the company does this analysis with an eye to the future, so in the second column we can see how the situation will change in the next 2-3 years. We see that some of the strategic sections are added to the basic ones that are on the list at the moment.
The list of basic sections will change according to the company's forecasts. The functionality of the product, the availability of high-tech equipment, the availability of a good IT system. This is still in the strategic sections, but since the standards of competition are growing, in 2-3 years it will move to the category of basic. It will be equally successful, cheap, fast, and of equal quality for everyone.
And the companies in the industry will be discussing the following list among themselves. On the design of furniture, on the ability to make int-poshiv, on the strength of the brand, on the warranty terms after warranty service, on the speed of order execution, on the speed of innovation and new ideas, both in the field of technology and in the field of materials.
Another strategic factor is the range of networks in which furniture is sold, as well as the design of the showcase and what is inside the store. And, of course, such an important point as working with customers in the salons. The company's strategy will be built around this list in the near future.
The rest of the questions are related to the category of basic. These questions should be solved by default. They are necessary, but not enough to win over competitors. This is the analysis of the factors of success. It should be done as a result of the analysis of the industry. I strongly recommend you do it.
I remind you that all analytical work before developing a strategy consists of two sections. This is a strategic analysis of the external environment and a strategic analysis of the company itself.
We discussed two basic tools that are recommended to use when analyzing the external environment. The analysis of the far factors, PEST, and the analysis of the near factors is a five-force scheme, which is very well described in the works of Michael Porter.
We now understand our external environment, we understand how it will change in the near future. The second work that we need to do is a strategic analysis of the company itself. What is good and what is not so good. And the second point is the so-called requirements of the owners, which can have a significant impact on our strategy.
The analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the company, which is convenient to do in the format of the so-called value chain. The value chain is a term that Michael Porter also proposed.
The idea is quite simple. A business can be imagined as a set of processes that create value for a target audience and processes that help these main processes create this value.
Porter calls the first category of processes primary processes, and the second category is secondary. Primary processes participate in the formation of value for a target audience, and secondary processes help the main processes create this value.
Let's imagine a conditional business, which is largely made up of six key processes. These are design, purchase, production, promotion, distribution, and service. All six processes can be called primary, because they are in a certain degree focused on creating value for a target audience.
The company also has auxiliary processes, which can be related to management of staff, management of finances, IT, general management. These are the things marked in yellow on this slide. They are usually through-the-way, helping the main processes create this value.
It is very convenient for each process to draw a triangle of time and quality to analyze its state at the moment. Ideally, each process of our company should be fast, high-quality, and inexpensive.
As in the old joke, in our restaurant, we can provide you with fast, inexpensive, and high-quality food, but you have to choose any of the three. Obviously, these triangles conflict with each other. As a rule, time conflicts with costs and quality. The faster, the more expensive, and probably the quality suffers.
The higher the quality, the more expensive it is, and the longer it takes. If the costs are low, there is a chance that we will have fast and low-quality food. If we want fast and high-quality, there will probably be more costs. We try to catch the optimum in this triangle of time and quality.
Let's look at an example. The company produces kitchen furniture and, according to this scheme, analyzes its strengths and weaknesses. We see some of its chains, namely design, purchase, production, promotion, sales and service.
Most likely, there will be both advantages and disadvantages in each piece of the chain, and a brief list of the company's pros and cons.
If we talk about their design, then, by and large, everything is good in this process. The company uses modern solutions for design, but, objectively assessing itself, says that it would be possible to implement innovations faster.
Customers want innovations, want something new, but the design team does not always do it quickly. Therefore, on a 10-point scale, 1 minimum, 10 maximum, we estimate this process at 7. A strong 7, but not more.
The purchasing process. Everything is not bad in this process. The company uses high-quality components, the process is well-organized, we are friends with the suppliers.
But there are disadvantages. In some positions, we depend heavily on the program of our suppliers. If a client comes to us and says, I want an orange countertop, we say that we only have blue, pink, yellow and lilac.
And the client says, I want an orange countertop. We have to call our suppliers and ask how quickly they can make the same orange countertop. Suppliers can say, sorry, guys, we have our schedule, we will release exclusively red in the next 3 months.
And such situations happen. The company tries to fight this, to actively manage this aspect, but it does not always work out. Therefore, we cannot give 10 points to this process at the moment, but we put a solid good 8.
The production process is also set aside for 8 points out of a maximum of 10. Everything is very good there, good equipment, high-tech, capable of performing individual requests, very low marriage level, very low waste level, very few in-production delays, set-aside production processes.
But there are a number of disadvantages. This is not a very high speed of order execution. Basically, this is due to the fact that limited production capacities do not allow our company to cope with the flow of orders that may be at the moment. And all this together, we add up and put a solid 8 to our production process.
We move on to promotion. Here, as we can see, everything is very bad, the score is very low, we have not found any advantages in this process, only one is a complete disadvantage. The main one is that our advertising policy is very uncreative and our advertising is extremely unrecognizable.
This is our competitive advantage, not our competitive disadvantage. Therefore, we cannot give more than 4 points to our promotion process on a 10-point scale. The sales process is set aside for 8 points. We have a well-developed network, we have a lot of our salons, well-made, well-designed.
The salons are regularly washed, the showcase works perfectly, but in the regions this network is not very large, we would like to have a larger, wider household network in the regions, so we put 8 points in total to this process at the moment.
As for the service process, the process is also well-developed, we have a longer warranty period than most competitors, and our installers, unlike the installers of our competitors, work very well. They come at the time when they were promised, they install the kitchen with the doors closed, this is the main position of the company.
It is undesirable for the client to see how the sausage is made and it is undesirable for the client to see how the kitchen is installed. When the kitchen is already installed, everything is ready, everything is sparkling, everything is shining, we invite the client, he enters the kitchen, he has the first emotion like this. And this is a very important emotion, because he remains loyal, he recommends us to his friends, and so on.
Well, a small competitive advantage of our company is that our installers, unlike the installers of our competitors, do not smell and do not have bruises under their eyes. Competitors have a problem with this, if our client orders a competitor's kitchen, two rather gloomy subjects will come to him, one with a bruise under the left eye, the other under the right eye, they will come with a delay, they will install with a large number of problems, and after that they will leave dirt and garbage behind.
We have everything in this process, not bad, 8 points, he deserves maybe even 9, but so as not to relax, we will put 8. If you look at the entire chain, you will see that the company has a lot of advantages, these processes are marked in green, there are outright failures, as with promotion, this is a weak point, a weak side of the company.
But there are processes, let's say, average, we evaluated the design process for 7, highlighted it in yellow, according to the principle of a traffic light, stating that it cannot be included in the list of strong and weak, it will be something average.
Here is an example of the analysis of weak and strong sides, but there is another nuance. An important point to remember when analyzing weak and strong sides is that some conditional weak sides can be an integral attribute of your business model, and you deliberately made them like this.
For example, visitors to discount stores located outside the ring city can complain that it is far to go there, that there is a very small assortment in discounters, and that there can be quite long queues at the cash registers in the evenings.
But these features are an integral attribute of the business model of discounters, and only one side of the coin, the other side of the coin is usually very low prices.
We cannot criticize a hacksaw for the fact that it is difficult to hammer nails or a hammer for the fact that it is difficult to cut a tree into pieces. These are the aspects we must remember when we analyze weak and strong sides of our company.
The next point is the requirements of the owners, which we often have to take into account before developing a strategy. In general, they can be divided into two parts, these are the financial requirements of the owners and the so-called non-financial ones.
As for the financial requirements, usually all owners want money and set a certain target value of the profitability coefficient for the invested capital. On the slide you see the abbreviation ROE, Return on Equity, a very simple formula, the profit factor that our business earns over a period in the denominator of the capital invested by the owners.
This is the amount of capital of the company without loans, without borrowed funds, how effectively the dollars, euros, rubles invested by the owners work in the company. They can set a target value that is usually associated with risks.
At the same time, we must understand that the value of this minimum profitability of the invested capital can be different within the same company. Imagine that there is a business consisting of four business units that operates on the spare parts market. The company has two business units that sell spare parts on the market A and two business units that sell spare parts on the market B.
At the same time, one business unit on each market sells spare parts, and the other one sells spare parts for trucks. The minimum profitability value for the capital that reflects the risks of running a business is 21%, 23% in the first business unit, 25% in the third, and 29% in the fourth business unit.
This is the minimum profitability of the invested capital, the minimum greed of the shareholder. Why is it different? Because the risks are different. The risks can be external and internal. For example, in one market, two business units receive capital at 21-23%, and in another market at 27-29%.
The market risks are different. In one market, the risks are slightly higher, in another market, the risks are slightly lower, so the value of this bet can change. In addition, the risks can be internal. In the market A, the shareholder sets a percentage bet of 21-23%, says that everything is under his control, a professional team of managers, I trust them completely, and therefore they receive capital cheaper.
And in another market, not only external risks are higher, but also the team of managers is not very professional, I am constantly stressed with some questions, I constantly advise what bulbs to buy for the warehouse, and something like that, so the capital will be more expensive for them. The minimum profitability value is 27-29%.
Another financial requirement is the size of the business. For example, a company works in the ceramic tile market, a network of salons in which beautiful Italian tiles are sold. The owner of this network, who has three points, says, I do not want to grow, I am satisfied with such a small family business consisting of three salons.
I do not want to be a big company, because a big company is managed differently, it is 37 hours of work day, and so on, and so on, and so on. I do not want to grow. Another owner in the same industry says, and I want to grow, I want to be a big company, have a large share of the market, and I need a lot of salons, I want a company with a high turnover.
The third financial requirement that owners can often voice is the ratio of their own and borrowed capital. Let's go back to the company that sells spare parts. Until recently, the company worked on its own, and the capital structure consisted of a very large percentage of its own capital, under 80%, and the remaining 20% is a creditor's debt.
In the bank, the company did not ask for money, because, in principle, it lacked its own, plus creditors. But the company thinks about making some projects on the real estate market, that is, not just to trade spare parts, but to build several large malls, such shopping centers, in which some number of square meters will be used for the sale of spare parts,
and some number of square meters will be given to the STO, to an inexpensive hotel, to a general food point. In general, the company is interested in the real estate market, and all free money is directed to this area, and business units that trade spare parts are now forced to go to banks and take money there for further development.
The owner says that there will be no more debt, and look for money in banks, earn a credit history, increase the share of borrowed capital. In principle, in the interests of the owner, these business units should take money from banks, and not demand debt.
But at the same time, it can denote a certain minimum value of their own capital, which should be in their balance structure, because if this value of their own capital is too small, then risks become very serious for the owner.
In principle, the general world practice says that the share of your own capital should hardly be less than 10-15%, and then it is too risky, and it should hardly be more than 80%, because your own capital is quite expensive, and in the interests of managers, it is better to take less expensive money from suppliers or banks.
In addition to financial requirements, the owners can issue so-called non-financial requirements. For example, the head of the company IKEA, Ingor Kamprad, said in an interview with a journalist that IKEA will no longer be a public company, it will remain a family enterprise, and this is his main position, and he explains it as follows.
Back in the mid-1980s, he had a meeting with the leaders of the Soviet Union, and the highest officials promised him that IKEA would not experience any problems in the Soviet market.
The officials said that the assistant was giving good, and that they could put a million-dollar store in each city, and that they would be grateful to them.
And IKEA began to enter this market in the mid-1980s, and in 2006, as far as I know, it earned its first euro profits, it was making profits for about 20 years.
If IKEA were a public company, Kamprad says, the shareholders would say, Ingor, what 20 years? We want a profit, well, a maximum of two years. And this is a common thing in a public company, that is why Kamprad wants IKEA to be non-public.
Non-financial demands may concern the image of the company. The company Benetton has no doubt about advertising, the company believes that it is normal to challenge society, to apotheosis society, and not everyone agrees with them,
but the management and owners of the company believe that this is normal, this is good, this is acceptable, and if the hiring management does not like it, the hiring management can most likely find another place to work.
Non-financial demands may concern the product portfolio. Howard Schulz, the creator of Starbucks, writes in his book, this is the American coffee network, that initially he wanted to build a business very similar to Italian coffee shops,
but in a boutique type of establishment, where a very professional bartender can hear the customers who ate borsch and crab salad for lunch today and ask the bartender what kind of coffee to drink, taking into account that I had borsch and crab salad for lunch.
And the bartender had to tell him that in your situation I recommend mixing an interesting mixture, 40% of this coffee grown in Sumatra, 40% of this coffee grown in Kenya, and 20% of the remaining coffee from Jamaica. If you fry this mixture and cook it, then at the end you will get a drink that smells a little like raspberries.
This will be the best for you, taking into account that you had borsch and crab salad. This is what Starbucks was thinking. Now we see a completely different business model, because when they started to grow, it seems that in California they were asked to offer not just classic Italian cappuccino, which is made with quite fatty milk, but in California they were asked to offer cappuccino with fat-free milk.
And Howard Schultz had to break his values, what is called through the knee, including such a cappuccino in his product portfolio. He did not want to, but the customers demanded it. In some other American city, customers demanded that he include a sandwich with sausage in the assortment. This also contradicted the original idea of ​​Italian coffee.
As a rule, in Italy, in coffee shops, they do not eat sandwiches with sausage, but if the customers want. The manager of another company can say, dear manager, I want our company to be innovative, and we are engaged in exclusively innovative projects. Not innovative, not interesting, I do not want our company to be engaged.
There may be some non-financial requirements in the field of personnel policy, there may be requirements, let's say, on basic values. In one company I read, in the inter-company constitution it was written in very large letters, we do not give discounts. This is the principal position of the owners, and they should not explain why. The company should not give discounts, consider that they have such cockroaches in their heads.
Or charity. One Italian company works in the ceramic tile market. Of course, it has some financial results, but the owner of the company, the most important thing, when he is at home, talking to his neighbors, he shows them a hedgehog.
A hedgehog is such an earth ball, a globe, pierced with needles. Each needle means a place where you can look, and if you want, buy a tile of this Italian company. Not all points work profitably, but the owner of the company can say that the tile of his company is known, not necessarily bought. And in the northeast of Bolivia, and so on.
There is a very high probability that some points will never make a profit, and there is a very high probability that the opening of these profit-loss points will contribute to sales in other places. Most likely, there is no connection, but this is a kind of non-financial requirement of the owner, and he is interested.
So think about what financial and non-financial requirements of your owners can affect the strategy of your business, and be sure to take this into account when developing a strategy.
So, here is our main scheme again. Analysis of the external environment, analysis of internal factors. We discussed what the PEST factors are and what the five forces of the industry are. We talked about what the analysis of the weak and strong sides is and outlined the significance of the last such moment, the requirements of the owners.
The next task is to analyze the strong and weak sides of your company. I recommend that you depict your business as a combination of key business processes. It seems to me that there should be 10-15 of them, as a rule, so as not to get lost in the depths. But at the same time, 10-15 provide an acceptable degree of detail.
So, you represent a business as a chain of processes. Some of them create value for the client, some of them help to create this value. You draw a triangle of costs and quality time for each process. Ideally, the 10-point process is inexpensive, high-quality and fast, or temporary.
The process that we set to 1 or 2 on a 10-point scale is bad in all three corners. It is expensive, it requires a lot of resources, it is slow or not timely, and it is not very high-quality. But you must understand the achievements and problems that exist at the moment, digest it all and set a score.
The score is well remembered, you can use the principle of a traffic light, red, yellow, green. And those processes that are set to paint in green, those processes that have a lot of problems with buy-outs, we draw in red. And such average processes can be yellow.
Another task is to analyze the requirements of the owners. We remember that they can affect the strategy of the company quite seriously. And, in principle, they consist of two sections – financial and non-financial.
Financial is, as a rule, a requirement for the level of profitability for the capital itself and for the share of the capital in the overall structure. Non-financial can be called cockroaches, but they have to be taken into account when developing a strategy.
They can be related to the product portfolio, personnel policy, sphere of activity, and, in principle, anything. They need to be understood, they need to be recorded, they need to be taken into account.
Igor Armitiev, co-founder and chief company officer of Svetlana Erasateeva, resource manager, Krasnaya 就是azeri.net
Another analysis is a summary analysis, known as SWOT analysis, weak and strong sides, possibilities and threats.
It is done based on the results already obtained.
We see that PEST analysis, analysis of five forces, analysis of weak and strong sides are included in this SWOT analysis.
Let's see how it is done.
The general scheme is shown on the slide.
Four fields.
In one field we briefly list our key and strong sides of the business.
In another field we talk about our disadvantages, our problems, which we have at the moment.
In general, weak sides.
Again, briefly, the most key points.
Two more fields are intended for listing opportunities or chances and threats or risks.
There is an opinion, in my opinion, it is not quite correct, that the possibilities and threats are only some external phenomena from the external environment, from PEST or from five forces.
It's not quite like that.
My friends in Munich, the Controller Academy, were created back in 1971.
Albrecht Dail, their founding father, in his best years, gathered 120-150 people for author seminars.
They paid very good money and there was a fairly large list of expectations.
I remember those times from nostalgia, because those were very good times.
It was the same as having a license to print money.
But somewhere in the late 90s Dail began to hold less author seminars.
And in 2002, it seems, he was going to retire.
He raised a number of so-called apostles, his followers, his supporters, who continue to develop his ideas.
But they did not give.
Dail is the founding father, he gathered a large number of people for author seminars.
And the managers, conducting a photo analysis, say that there is a very high probability that sales will drop if our founding father retires.
The same way as the managers of the Manchester United football club can conduct a photo analysis and say that if Cristiano Ronaldo goes to Real,
the stadium will not be filled 100%, because a lot of people go to Cristiano Ronaldo.
So there can be threats and opportunities both from the outside and from the inside.
What we did at the stage of the PEST analysis and the analysis of the five forces, it is connected here, these two large arrows below.
But the arrows on the side, on the right and on the left, these light yellow ones, are some things from the inside,
which may well be here, remember the situation with Albert Dail, who was going to retire at the Controller Academy.
An example of a photo analysis in front of you.
This is a business that produces kitchen furniture.
In the yellow fields we see a list of the key strengths and weaknesses, as well as a list of key opportunities and threats.
Let's see. The company, among its strengths, has a high quality of products.
The product itself is cool, polished, there is little defect, the client likes it, it serves for a long time, there are constant compliments.
The company says that our strong point is the availability of good equipment, high-tech, flexible, which allows us to meet individual requests of our clients.
We currently have a very well-developed SBT network in the capital, and this is definitely our competitive advantage, our strong point.
The installation process is well-organized, the installers are polite, correct, professional, and they have a small feature,
when the installation of the kitchen is carried out, they invite the hostess home, show her the newly installed cool kitchen,
and give the hostess a beautiful rose, unexpected, and this affects the loyalty of the clients much more than all the outdoor advertising on the Leningrad Prospect.
This is a small feature, in principle, can be attributed to the list of strong points.
Weaknesses. The company, in principle, cannot boast of the brand's fame.
It cannot say that the brand is loud and that the company is very recognizable.
This is not the case at the moment, unfortunately.
There is no developed network in the regions yet, and this is a weak point.
Technical innovations, innovations in materials are introduced quite slowly.
We have already said that the dependence on the main suppliers is quite high.
These four positions can be considered a list of weaknesses.
As for the opportunities, the welfare of the target segment is growing, and the culture of consumption is changing.
The company would like to train its clients to be Italian, and the clients react to this easily, agree to behave like Italians when buying,
and the company is grateful to them for this and says that this is a positive fact.
In the market, credit resources are becoming more and more accessible,
and the company can use relatively inexpensive money to open corporate salons in the regions
and to credit its clients when buying a kitchen.
The company also considers the development of IT and the Internet as a chance, as a very interesting opportunity.
However, there are a number of problems, potential threats or risks.
The risk is the escalation of competition, the growth of value resources,
the increase of attention from the state to business, and the potential decline in the economy.
In principle, this is a classic SWOT analysis, when we briefly summarized our achievements and problems on one page,
and also identified the key opportunities and risks.
When we did SWOT analysis, a very useful addition to it is a cross-analysis within this SWOT analysis,
when we try to establish connections between the strong sides of our company and the existing opportunities and risks in these four fields,
as well as discuss how our weak sides are connected with existing opportunities and risks.
In this field, we ask ourselves how we can use our strong sides to take advantage of the opportunities that are open to us.
Or what opportunities, especially in the external environment, can make our strong sides even stronger.
Moving on to this field, we ask ourselves how we can fight the threats that we have to take into account in our business
due to our strong sides.
The second question we should ask ourselves is how threats and risks,
especially from the external environment, can weaken our strong sides, destroy them.
Moving on to this field, we ask ourselves what opportunities we can use to eliminate our weak sides,
which we should eliminate.
The second question is very important.
What disadvantages can prevent us from using the opportunities that are open to us?
And the last question, in the worst case scenario, on the cross-section of weak sides and threats,
is what disadvantages can prevent us from confronting the threats that we have.
The second question is whether external threats can further aggravate our weak sides.
This is a so-called cross-analysis that we do on the cross-section of these fields.
The results of this cross-analysis can be seen on the slide.
Each of the four squares has some ideas that can be taken and recorded in the business strategy right now.
So, let's go back to this slide, looking at which we are thinking about how to live on.
The distributor of household chemicals and cosmetics asks itself what's next, production, logistics or retail?
The company that produces lasers remains in this industry, remains a laser manufacturer,
but it can also develop in three ways.
Operational improvement, polishing the production and purchasing processes.
Innovative product leadership, investing in New Yorker, strengthening the brand, supplementing it with services.
The client is polished, not offering any innovative solutions, but making a customized product,
as much as possible tailored to the needs of each specific client.
But, of course, you also need to work well in the service sector.
These are three different ways.
And the first and second companies choose their own way, strategic analysis helps,
which, I will remind you again, consists of the following four tasks.
This is the analysis of the factors of the long-term environment in the external environment, PEST,
the policy of the economy and social technology.
Analysis of the factors of the near-term environment in the industry.
This is the competition of the supplier, client, suppliers and the fifth force, the entry barriers.
When analyzing the company, we look at its strong sides and its weak sides,
and also study the requirements of the owners.
After analyzing all these issues, we can think about alternatives and, in the end,
choose our strategy, choose our general line of the party.
The next task is the final SWOT analysis.
It is a summary of all previous analytical work.
We have to put it into the format of one page, which we divide into four parts,
rewrite the key strong and weak sides,
denote the key threats,
and then try to establish the connections between the strong sides of the threat,
as well as the weak sides of the threat.
After that, we have a complete picture of the state of our business at the moment,
what are its prospects, what are the chances it has to be considered,
and what are the threats to the internal environment, as well as to the internal one.
This is the necessary base on which we develop our strategy for the near future.
The final SWOT analysis
The key organizational aspects
In conclusion, I would like to focus on the key organizational aspects,
which are important to remember when conducting a strategic analysis.
My experience allows me to say that it is very good
if a small initiative group of three or four people is formed,
which will prepare a draft for discussion in a more extensive composition.
This small initiative group should consist of three or four people
who work in different structural divisions.
This includes marketing, production, logistics, and finance.
People from different divisions of the company will complement each other,
and after some work, they will be able to make a basic version for discussion.
This basic version is then discussed in an extensive composition at a meeting,
where 15-20 people can be invited.
They will listen to the members of the initiative group,
study this basic version, and start discussing, correcting, and supplementing it.
This is much more effective than gathering and discussing an empty sheet of paper.
If there was no such preliminary draft version,
a lot of time will go to preparing some raw information,
which must then be structured, organized, and presented in a normal way.
It is much more effective to make a basic version before the meeting,
and then discuss it in a wide circle.
Everything that is discussed at this meeting is recommended to be recorded
in e- or paper form, because very good thoughts are sometimes forgotten.
If they are put on paper, there is a chance that they will be realized.
I think that the exit format is necessary.
It is very difficult to disconnect from your routine in the office,
it is very difficult to disconnect your mobile phone in the office.
But if you go to the forest, breathe fresh air,
open your chakras, this process will be much more effective.
I think that you should do this twice a year.
I recommend going to a dental doctor twice a year.
I think that strategic tests should also be taken twice a year,
because everything changes quickly in every industry,
competition changes, clients change.
If you do not do this often enough, there is a chance that you will not have time.
Dear colleagues, I am sure that in addition to using your business,
you are conducting strategic tests,
you will enjoy the tests.
I hope that the thoughts that you saw in these slides
will be useful for your business.